# *Very Large Aircraft*

It is not at all certain that the supersonic Concorde will be followed by fleets of new supersonic cruise civil transports. However, the prospect of subsonic commercial jet transports larger and heavier than the Boeing 747-400 is almost a certainty, with some Airbus A380 superjumbo jets already on order. Thus, it is reasonable to review the expected stability and control problems for very large airplanes.

#### **23.1 The Effect of Higher Wing Loadings**

Higher wing loadingsthan on airplanesof the Boeing 747-400 and advanced 777 classes seem inevitable for commercial airplanes of the 1,000-seat category, if these airplanes are to fit into current airport terminals, runways, taxiways, and maintenance facilities that have had reasonable modifications. Folding wings, tandem main wings, or some other radical departures from current technology would get around the necessity of higher wing loadings, but radical innovationsare unlikely in airplanesthat will be asexpensive assuperjumbo jets. All-wing superjumbo jets have been studied by several groups, but the Boeing and Airbus designs for superjumbo jets show quite conventional arrangements.

Some of the stability and control consequences of using high wing loadings in very large airplanescan be predicted. Higher wing loadingsthan current practice imply higher fuel weightsrelative to the aerodynamic forcesgenerated by the wingsand stabilizing surfaces. Dynamic fuel slosh effects, a nonproblem for 747-class airplanes, will require a fresh analytical look.

## **23.2 The Effect of Folding Wings**

Folding wingsasa device for fitting very large airplanesinto airport ramps, taxiways, and maintenance areas would have stability and control consequences. While fairly long wing sections could fairly readily be folded up, shortening fuselages by folding hardly seemspractical. Thismeansthat tail length in termsof wing spanswould be reduced.

Longitudinal stability and control would be adversely affected by the shorter relative tail length of folding wing designs. Higher downwash and larger trim drag would result. There would be increased yawing moment due to rolling. An extended-span transport airplane would have some of the flight behavior of a high-performance sailplane, with strong demands on rudder power to coordinate rolls. However, the most adverse effect and most difficult to correct would be reduced rudder power for low-speed control with an engine out.

Even without folding wings, the current AirbusA380 layout has10- to 20-percent reduced tail length in terms of wing span than current designs, such as the Boeing 747-400. The same adverse trends in stability and control as for the folding wing case, noted above, might be expected.

#### **23.3 Altitude Response During Landing Approach**

An early pilot-induced oscillation experience with the Space Shuttle Orbiter ALT-FF5 landing approach tests (Powers, 1986) led to some concern about the shuttle's combination of large airplane size and distance of the pilot ahead of the center of gravity, and initially reversed altitude response with elevon control deflections. On the shuttle, more than 2 seconds elapses before altitude starts to increase following a step nose-up elevon deflection (Phillips, 1979). F. A. Cleveland (1970) gives a value of 0.8 second for this delay parameter on the C-5A Galaxy and speculates that glide path control during landing approach would be unsatisfactory for time delays above 2 seconds.

Cleveland'sanalysisof the effectsof airplane size givesa linear growth in the altitude delay parameter with size. Time delay would reach 2 seconds on a C-5A scaled up about 2.4 times, requiring direct lift control or canard surfaces. Digital sampling delays in the pitch control circuit and elevon rate limiting are known to contribute to the Space Shuttle's pilot-induced oscillation tendency. According to Robert J. Woodcock (1988)

extensive, continual training [for the Space Shuttle Orbiter] has resulted in very good landing performance (smooth landings with small dispersion, mostly on long runways, in smooth air).

The conclusion is that large airplane sizes might indeed lead to landing approach problems related to delayed altitude responses following pitch control inputs and special design featuresto correct the problem.

An alternate criterion for the control response of very large airplanes is the generic response to abrupt control inputs, as shown in Figure 10.5. Grantham, Smith, Person, Meyer, and Tingas(1987) compared large airplane flying qualitieswith the generic pitch response requirementsof MIL-F-8785C. Maximum effective time delaysof 0.10 to 0.12 second are specified in MIL-F-8785C, based on tests of relatively small tactical airplanes. These requirementsmay be much too stringent for large airplanesin all but very high-gain operations. Satisfactory, or Level 1, flying qualities are obtained in simulation of a Lockheed 1011–class transport for effective time delays of 0.15 second, suggesting even larger acceptable values for superjumbo jets. On the other hand, the effective longitudinal axis dynamics of the Boeing 777 compares with some fighters.

John Gibson (1995) suggests that the observed sluggish response of the Space Shuttle Orbiter iscaused by poor control lawsasmuch asairplane size. Increasing pitch rate overshoot in a pullup would improve the observed sluggish flight path angle response. This further suggests that the flexibility of fly-by-wire technology can provide the necessary quickness of response in large airplanes without requiring special features such as direct lift control or canards.

## **23.4 Longitudinal Dynamics**

The flight characteristics of current-day large airplanes such as the Lockheed C-5A Galaxy can offer some cluesasto what to expect from the really large machinesof the future. For example, the C-5A's longitudinal short-period oscillation approaches in frequency that of the phugoid oscillation (Mueller, 1970). Normally, the short-period oscillation is much higher in frequency than the phugoid oscillation.

This is not surprising since the phugoid oscillation frequency depends only on an airplane's true airspeed and is invariant with airplane size. However, airplane short-period frequency is proportional to the square root of the quantity (linear dimension cubed divided by pitching moment of inertia). That combination of parametersvariesroughly as the reciprocal of a linear dimension, such as wing span or fuselage length, implying lower frequency short-period oscillations for large airplanes.

The practical consequence, according to Mueller, isthat the C-5A isdifficult to trim for a particular airspeed. Pilotsreport that the airplane wandersabout a trim point.

Additional longitudinal dynamicsproblemscould be encountered on very large airplanes as a result of low-frequency flexible modes.

#### **23.5 Roll Response of Large Airplanes**

Experience with C-5A roll response shows possible shortcomings of current requirements when applied to really large airplanes. William D. Grantham (1983) reports:

[C]onsiderable effort and expense were initially expended on the C-5A in an attempt to meet a requirement for rolling to an 8 degree bank angle in one second. It was later determined from flight teststhat the handling qualitiesof the C-5A were totally acceptable with less than one-half such roll capability.

This implies that careful research is needed to establish time-to-bank requirements for superjumbo jets, to avoid overdesign.

#### **23.6 Large Airplanes with Reduced-Static Longitudinal Stability**

In a paper on stability augmentation for a large, flexible airplane that appears to be the Boeing 777, Greta Ward (1996) makes an interesting observation on the limitations of reduced-static longitudinal stability when applied to large airplanes. Reduced-static longitudinal stability is an attractive feature for long-range airplanes, reducing cruise flight trim drag and fuel consumption. In any such application, a designer must retain a suitable margin of longitudinal control power to recover from inadvertent upsets, upsets that would be opposed by static stability in airplanes of normal longitudinal stability.

Pitch moment of inertia variesasthe fifth power of fuselage length, while the maximum available pitching moment produced by a horizontal tail surface variesonly asthe third power of fuselage length. This implies an upper limit to fuselage length and airplane size if reduced-static longitudinal stability is to be used.

## **23.7 Large Supersonic Airplanes**

A successor to the supersonic Concorde is likely to be a large airplane, in the sense considered here. The stability and control problems of supersonic flight and low-speed flight of a low-aspect-ratio design would be added to those of large airplanes. A general review of the combined problems(Steer and Cook, 1999) reflectsexperience with the Concorde. The authorsconclude that a foreplane, or canard surface, would be needed in place of the tailplane used in the Boeing/NASA High-Speed Commercial Transport (HCST) design.

## **23.8 Concluding Remarks**

Stability and control problemsthat may be encountered by very large (1,000-seat) airplanes can be reasonably well anticipated. We assume that compatibility with current ground facilities will constrain airplane size at the same time that weight is increased. The following problemsare expected:

more prominent dynamic fuel slosh effects and more severe flexible mode effects; increased adverse yaw in rolls and reduced rudder power for low-speed control with an engine out, because of reduced tail length in terms of wing span;

- possible requirement for direct lift control or canards, to overcome delay in altitude response to pitch control;
- trimming problems as a result of the merging of longitudinal short-period and phugoid frequencies;
- control overdesign unless appropriate required time-to-bank and acceptable control delay criteria are found;
- reduced static longitudinal stability for lower cruise fuel consumption may not be available because of limited control pitching moments for recovery from upsets;
- flight control system complexity to accommodate maneuver load control and gust alleviation.